---
layout: post
title: "What Adequate Functional Programming in JS taught me"
tags: functional-programming, javascript
---

I'm one of those developers who actually got hooked on the new age fad of [Functional Programming][1].

Aside from that alot of the experts in our industry (in terms of software craftsmanship) are actually learning and digging deeper 
into the paradigm.

[Mark Seeman][1] for instance has written a series of articles on the benefits of Functional Programming and its abstractions that make code easier to read, understand and maintain.

[Uncle Bob][2] made it very clear that one should learn it so that concurrency issues are more easily handled.

So as I picked up Javascript or NodeJS to be exact I decided to learn the paradigm. One of the best free books I have read on the subject was [Adequate Functional Programming in Javascript][3].

The things I learned from the book that were easily digestible for me: 

* First-Class functions
* Currying and Partial Application
* Function Composition


## First-Class functions

**In JS functions are first class.** If you've got a function that expects a function you should just pass it directly. 

As an example I'll use`map` from the `Array` class.

    const numbers = [1,2,3]

    const addOne = (x) => x + 1

    numbers.map(addOne)

But alot of times as the author points out it ends up being like this:
    
    const numbers = [1,2,3]

    const addOne = (x) => x + 1

    numbers.map(x => addOne(x))

Although there are no problems with both versions you have to change more parts in the second example when `map` sends more than one arguments to the given function.

Lets say instead of just `addOne` you also want to add in the index as well.

So the function changes like this (hypothetically):

    const addOneAndIndex = (x,y) => x + y + 1

If you were using the first example the change would just be a rename of the passed function.

    numbers.map(addOneAndIndex)

In the second example you would have to add in the extra arguments in as well:

    numbers.map(x,y => addOneAndIndex(x,y))


[1]: http://blog.ploeh.dk/
[2]: http://blog.cleancoder.com/uncle-bob/2017/07/11/PragmaticFunctionalProgramming.html
[3]: https://mostly-adequate.gitbooks.io/mostly-adequate-guide/
